[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There's this prevailing
myth that somehow aging is like
a disease.
So is there a cure
for aging and death,
and should this be our aim?
[THEME MUSIC]
Welcome back to "Limitless."
Today we're talking
about age and longevity.
I'll start you off with a
quote from Myles Munroe.
He said, "Most people die at age
25 and are buried at age 65."
Are we helpless victims
on this long journey
from cradle to grave?
From diet to lifestyle to
mindset to advanced technology,
can we cheat death and
stay young forever?
Well, let's look back
in history at people
who have supposedly done it.
If you see, in
the Old Testament,
a character named Sarah,
the wife of Abraham,
she lived to the
ripe old age of 127.
In Asia, the story of
Chen Yun, who supposedly
lived 16,100 years.
And the oldest documented
living person in history
was Jeanne Calment--
born in Arles, France,
lived to 122 years old.
Before 1900, she remembers
meeting Vincent van Gogh when
he visited her father's shop.
So she did it.
She arrived at an
incredibly old age.
From the 4,000 year
old Babylonian poem,
"The Epic of Gilgamesh," all
the way to stories and legends
of the fountain of youth
and the elixir of life,
stories of immortality
and this quest
is written into
our genetic code,
into our cultural heritage.
But what exactly is aging?
What is this process, and how
can understanding this process
help us along on the path of
unlocking our hidden potential?
Well, let's see
what David Wolfe has
to say in an episode
of "Inspirations"
with Lisa Garr called Superfood
Secrets to Optimal Health.
>> There's a number of
meanings to the aging process.
One is oxidation.
OK.
Free radical theory of aging--
what the heck does that mean?
>> Right.
>> When we're born out
of our mothers' waters,
we've never seen the atmosphere.
The oxygen we breathe
actually hurts us.
Another theory of aging
has to do with methylation,
and we're basically-- that's
why we need raw foods,
so we have enough methyl groups.
Another one is telomeres.
>> OK.
>> So like a shoelace, right?
There's that little thing,
that little plastic thing
at the end of the shoelace.
When we're born, we
have that little thing.
It protects the ends
of our chromosomes.
>> Right.
>> OK.
With every cell replication, a
little bit of that chromosome
is lost--
>> In the little, tiny hairs--
>> --in every cell.
>> --on a cell?
>> Yeah.
The little end of
the filament is lost.
There's a little bit of
damage at the end of the DNA.
With every cell-- let's say it's
a white blood cell, let's say--
>> OK.
>> --it's a muscle
cell or a heart cell--
we lose a little bit.
That doesn't make much of a
difference in a year or 10
years or 15 years or 30 years.
But in 100 years, it
makes a huge difference.
>> But how do these cycles of
time truly affect the body?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
How can these cycles of time
be seen in our telomeres?
You heard David Wolfe
talking about telomeres
like that little plastic piece
on the end of a shoelace,
to keep it from unraveling
and coming apart.
And it gets shorter
each and every time
our cells divide and the
chromosomes are split apart.
And every time they
get shorter, this
is showing us that we
have less and less time.
So this is what's really
important about understanding
the cycles of time
that we live through,
what it means for
our body, and what it
might mean for our telomeres.
Because, as we know,
these telomeres,
they show our physiological
age but they don't really
show how many years
we've actually lived.
It's not like rings on a tree
saying how many seasons they've
gone through.
Telomeres can be
different according
to your age because
of how you've lived
your life-- your lifestyles.
So in that wiggle room
between age and telomere
length lies your
hidden potential
on how to approach
aging and longevity.
We are not helpless victims.
We have a lot of information, a
lot of wisdom at our disposal,
and we can use it.
Even in modern
science, we're being
shown that eating
the proper foods,
getting enough vitamins
B, D, and E, as well
as fish oils such as
the omega 3 fatty acids,
and staying away from omega
6's, from red meats and peanuts,
actually preserves
our telomere length.
So there is a simple
hack, a simple tool.
Now let's take a
look at the fact
that our body regenerates
itself over time.
You may have heard this
myth that in seven years
you have a brand new
body, because all
the cells in your body
regenerate and replenish
themselves.
In over seven years, we
have a very new body--
maybe not fully new, but
this is really good news.
We do regenerate over time.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But telomeres are not cells.
The question now rises,
can telomeres regenerate?
Let's take a look
at a film called,
"Taking Back the Years."
>> Telomeres are the
ends of our chromosomes.
So I've got a
cartoon here to show.
Everything that you are
is encoded on the DNA
that's in these chromosomes.
It turns out, right
at the very tips--
right above this
goldish color here--
are the structures
called telomeres.
They cap the ends
of our chromosomes.
>> So can we lengthen
our telomeres again?
>> In the series of tests that
were done by Dr. Abraham Aviv,
he had shown that morbidly obese
people have shorter telomeres,
but that when they lose a lot
of weight their telomeres come
back.
That's actually good news.
Because if those tests turned
out to be completely correct,
it suggests that lifestyle
modifications can, in fact,
improve your telomere health.
>> If something like losing
weight can add length
to our telomeres and effectively
add years to our life,
then this means we are not
helpless victims on this
journey from cradle to grave.
So let's go a little bit deeper.
Let's take a look
at what centenarians
are doing to stay old longer.
Centenarians are that
group of the population
that hits 100 years
and keeps living.
According to a study, this
is one of the largest growing
demographics of the population.
By 2030, there should be a
million centenarians worldwide.
And another fun little tidbit--
80% of those
centenarians are women.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What is it?
What are their character traits?
What can we learn from
these centenarians?
Well, let's go even deeper.
Let's go back to Dr. Mario
Martinez in an "Inspirations"
episode with Lisa Garr called
Rewriting the Genetic Code.
>> What would you say that these
centenarians have in common?
>> These things that
we're pointing out here,
they have a tremendous
sense of humor.
The present is always an
opportunity to make decisions.
They know how to forgive--
extremely important.
It's that resilience, that
way of looking at things--
>> Yeah.
>> And I asked them, do
you hate those people?
"I dislike him,
but I'm not going
to waste any time
with people like that.
I have too many things to do."
>> You may have heard the whole
adage of forgive and forget,
but I take the Tupac
Shakur approach--
forgive but don't forget.
Truthfully, there may
be no reason to forget.
It actually may not be
advantageous to forget.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So what is it about
our memory of the past,
those things that we hold
onto that weigh us down?
Could our burdens be
seen like bags of bricks?
Things that we could
just simply put down.
If we don't need them anymore,
why are we holding them?
So if we get better
at the skill of being
able to notice when a burden
that does not serve you
comes along--
so you could just
simply put it down.
Here's a counterpoint though.
Do not be confused or
mistaken about the distinction
between burdens and
responsibilities.
Let's hold up our
end of the bargain
and truly make it a skill--
the ability to put down
things that do not serve us,
but to hold on to those
things that do serve us.
So let's take another
look at the centenarians
and see what skills do they have
that we can start tapping into.
Let's take a look at
the film, "Ikaria--
The Island Where
People Live Forever."
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
>> If I could turn back
time to when I was 30,
I would have made the
same mistakes again.
>> You would have
still married me.
>> (LAUGHING) The same mistakes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> [NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
If you are not from
Ikaria, everything
seems to be moving slow.
But for Ikarians, this
is their natural rhythm.
They have a deep-rooted
philosophy--
they dominate time.
Time does not dominate them.
Their attitude
toward stress seems
to help them tackle
their cardio illnesses.
[NON-ENGLISH SPEECH]
Ikarians have a
certain wisdom when it
comes to the pleasures of life.
They want to enjoy
human interaction.
They are in touch
with immediate family.
They have a calmness about
what may happen in the future.
They do not have the stress that
consumes the rest of the world.
>> These centenarians on the
island of Ikaria seem to have
a lot of tips and tricks on how
to stay young for a long time.
But the one I liked the
most was that they're not
victims of time.
They do not let themselves
be tossed around by the waves
on the ocean of life.
They become the dance
partner of time,
where there's this certain form
of harmony and communication
between them.
But it's not the
things that they
do, as much as how they do it--
the attitude that they bring
to these circumstances,
these situations, such
as smoking and drinking.
You've heard that these things
will cut minutes or years
off your life.
But there are many centenarians
that smoke and drink.
George Burns is a
great example of that.
Every evening, have a cigar
and a shot of whiskey.
If you can treat that moment
like a ritual, like a ceremony,
with great reverence for
life, an attitude of happiness
and joy that you get to
live these years longer,
this seems to be the trick.
So bringing a new you and a
new attitude into the things
that you do is not new.
It's actually one
of the oldest things
that you can see in
documented history.
It's called a
ritual and ceremony.
And when these tribes
would gather together
for grand ceremonies, the entire
community would come together.
Everyone would put their
heart into the same thing,
the same notion that
we should respect life
around the elements.
Tell stories, but do something
with that great attitude
for life and living.
This is beautiful, but
that's the old world.
What about the new world?
Now, let's take a look at a film
called, "How to Live Forever--
Results May Vary"
by Mark Wexler.
>> I predict that
within about 10 years,
so long as the funding for the
research is sufficiently good,
we may have breakthroughs in
the laboratory in mice that will
make it clear that it's only
a matter of time before we can
essentially eliminate
aging in humans.
There's going to be a wide
variety of different stem cell
therapies to repopulate
tissues that are losing cells.
There's going to be
vaccines involved.
There's almost certainly going
to be standard small molecule
drugs involved--
lots of different
things put together.
Now, the aging process
will not, of course,
be eliminated from
the body in this way.
It'll be just like repair and
maintenance of the machine.
So it'll need to be
reapplied periodically.
>> The most significant
revolution of our lifetime will
be the creation of
the ageless society.
It will dwarf the
creation of the computer.
Aging is no longer inevitable.
Anti-aging medicine is a very
contained, very scientific,
very objective clinical science.
But the anti-aging
marketplace, you know,
is everything from
Botox to plastic surgery
to sports medicine.
So it's around the kernel of
what anti-aging medicine is.
>> Initially, I knew nothing
about calorie restriction
and didn't really
care about longevity.
I just went to the
medical library
to learn about nutrition.
And then I happened upon
Roy Walford's research with
rodents, showing that when you
give them less-- in some cases,
a lot less than what they
normally eat, 30%, 40%,
45% less--
they live much, much longer,
sometimes as much as 50% or 60%
longer.
>> You may have
already guessed--
all these things that
we've been told about aging
and longevity, these future
technologies, these ideas,
these methods,
they're in existence.
They're here.
They're already at our disposal.
If you have access
to the internet,
all of this information is
readily available to you
and all of your loved ones.
It may be a common thing
to hear advice but not
be able to employ
it in the moment,
because we're too deeply
in our groove in the things
that we always do.
Even if we think about
the solution at the time,
sometimes it seems difficult
to change our behavior.
But as we look deeper into these
technologies and potentially
future technologies-- things
that haven't been created yet--
is it possible to
download our consciousness
onto a computer database?
Is it possible for us
to live consciously
without a body in the
everlasting anatomy
of a computer?
Well, the first
thing I have to go to
is IBM's Blue Gene Project.
And in this, they are trying
to simulate the brain,
because there's this belief
that the neuronal activity
in the brain accounts for
all of our consciousness.
So if you can have a computer
that has the same processing
power as all of the
neurons in the human brain,
then it's potential that you
could download consciousness
into this computer
and live forever.
So how is IBM's Blue Gene
Project coming along?
Well, they have the
processing power now of a cat.
That's excellent, right?
Well, almost.
It's about 100 times
slower than a cat.
So they're not quite there yet.
Now, there's this
Cambridge neuroscientist
that I deeply respect,
Dr. Hannah Critchlow.
Here's what she has to say
when somebody asked her,
can we live inside a computer?
Can our consciousness be
downloaded into a database?
"People could probably
live inside a machine.
Potentially, I think it is
definitely a possibility."
Does that mean anything?
She said probably, potentially,
possibly, definitely, maybe.
We don't know, and
this is probably
the best response she could have
given because we truly do not
know if this is a possibility.
So I started looking
deeper into this question,
and I happened upon Dr. Jeff
Hawkins, one of the best
researchers on what
is intelligence
and can intelligence be
reproduced by a computer.
Well, he says flat out
we're not even close yet,
because we don't even understand
the mechanisms of our brain.
Many people believe that
our brains store data.
But as he's saying, it does not.
Computers store data.
Our brains recall
sequences of patterns.
Our brains don't even store
the sequences of patterns.
They recall the
sequences of patterns.
What he actually says, this
very grounded researcher,
he says that these sequences
of patterns are stored
holographically,
extra-cerebrally,
outside of the mind--
meaning having less
to do with neurology
and more to do with our ability
to access consciousness,
access the mind, access
these sequences of patterns.
So that's a very good point to
show us that we may not even
be close to this.
But the real point that
I'm getting at is--
let's just say we could
live to 200 years.
Let's just say the average
lifespan could be 500 years.
OK, let's just go all
the way to 1,000 years.
How would that change
things on this planet?
Would retirement age
still be 65 if you're
going to live to 1,000?
Would we all be rushing out
to have a job by the age of 20
or get married at
the age of 20, 25
if we live to 1,000 years old?
And what are some
of the changes that
would happen, that we can't
even wrap our minds around,
because our life expectancy
is roughly 70, 80?
How would it improve the wisdom?
Remember those archmaesters
that hold the wisdom
and the knowledge of the world?
How would the sciences, the
religions, the philosophies,
the arts be changed?
Would they be enriched?
Would they deteriorate?
Would living longer actually
give you a better life?
Would living longer
on this planet truly
mean that you are
living a better life?
Because if we are a riddle
figuring ourselves out,
what does that mean?
Do we need to spend
more time on this planet
or do we need more presence?
I would hazard to say
we need more presence,
that way we can live
those years more fully.
So now I'm going to toss it off
to somebody I really respect.
Her name's Kimberly Gamble.
>> I'm watching my wrinkly
arms and hands and stuff,
and I just love it.
I feel so grateful
that I love it,
because I know the whole
aging thing in this culture
is just horrible for women.
You know?
I mean, it's like
this, if you're not
young there's no use for you.
And thankfully, I'm
not experiencing that.
And instead, I'm
feeling it like my body
is this constant spiritual
teacher, because it's
so transient like everything.
And I'm watching myself kind of
wrinkle out of it in some way.
>> Man, I love these
words by Kimberly.
It's so beautiful
to hear somebody
who's living it and also
embracing those years of age.
Because isn't that
truly the trick?
Embracing the coming
of age, seeing it
as a gift, something that
can teach us about ourselves.
Because it's not so much about
the quantity of our years,
but the quality of our years.
Time is a tool.
It really is.
It's what we do with time.
I believe the best way we can
approach aging and longevity is
to take all that wisdom, not
to amass a fortune of time,
but to amass a fortune of
wisdom, not just for us,
not for self-serving reasons,
but to serve the planet,
to serve others--
to bring more real
wisdom, real solutions
to the human condition,
the human problems,
the global issues that we face.
This would be the purpose.
This would be the
quality of our years.
Martin Luther King Jr.
said, "If a man has not
discovered something
that he will die for,
then he isn't fit to live."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So here's my challenge for you--
find what you would die for.
Find what you believe is to
be the most important reason
why you are here on this
planet, and don't hoard it.
Share it.
And if you do this, even just
once, in the next coming week
or in your entire
lifetime, then I truly
honor and respect that
choice that you made,
and I thank you so much for
coming around and watching
"Limitless."
[THEME MUSIC]